# Chapter 13: Attitude reference system

***

## Applications of the Kalman Filter

* Noise removal
* Estimating a state variable that was not measured
* Sensor fusion - combine multiple low-quality sensors to make a high-quality one

### Aerospace engineering applications

* Largest number of applications in the aerospace engineering industry.
* Applied to the Apollo lunar exploration from the start.
* Especially useful in navigation to measure the position & attitude of an aircraft/satellite

***

## Figuring out horizontal attitude with accelerometers and gyroscopes

An accelerometer/gyro is also known as an inertial navigation sensor -
they return a measurement with respect to the inertial frame.
This is the standard coordinate system for Newtonian mechanics.

Navigation techniques that measure position and attitude with inertial sensors
is called inertial navigation. Inertial navigation includes position, velocity,
and attitude.

***

## Problem Statement

We are developing an algorithm to measure horizontal attitude of a helicopter.
Attitude is found by using a Kalman filter to combine measurements from an accelerometer and gyroscope.
These two sensors complement each other.

Paraphrasing, we want to find the tilted angle of the helicopter w.r.t. the horizontal plane. 
We must derive this from measured acceleration and angular velocity.

While this problem involves a helicopter, the same techniques can be applie to 
other systems, such as a walking robot.

### Attitude of an object

Attitude of an object is accurately expressed with the three Euler angles:
* Roll (\phi) - horizontal
* Pitch (\theta) - horizontal
* Yaw (\psi) - vertical

### Generating test data

Suppose we've finished implementing the attitude determination algorithm and now
want to test it, but have no appropriate data.

So we generate our own test data by oscillating the navigation sensor with a sinusoidal 
wave of 0.25 Hz and +/- 30 deg amplitude.

The procedure for generating test data at a sampling rate of 0.01s is:

```
Roll (1 min) ==> Roll-pitch (1 min) ==> Pitch (1 min)
```

The data generated by the test is accelerations and angular velocities along and
about all three axes.

To validate the attitude determination algorithm, we examine how well the estimate
of the attitude follows the trajectory of the vibration applied.

***

